README.md, before:

# Tabular

A lightweight, terminal-based CSV editor with vim-like keybindings.

## Installation

```bash
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

```bash
tabular <file.csv>
```

## Key Bindings

### Normal Mode

#### Navigation
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `h` / `←` | Move left |
| `j` / `↓` | Move down |
| `k` / `↑` | Move up |
| `l` / `→` | Move right |
| `gg` | Jump to first row |
| `G` | Jump to last row |
| `[N]G` | Jump to row N (e.g., `10G` jumps to row 10) |
| `0` / `^` | Jump to first column |
| `$` | Jump to last column |
| `Ctrl+d` | Half page down |
| `Ctrl+u` | Half page up |
| `Ctrl+f` | Full page down |
| `Ctrl+b` | Full page up |

**Count prefix**: Most navigation keys accept a count prefix. For example:
- `5j` moves down 5 rows
- `10l` moves right 10 columns
- `3k` moves up 3 rows

#### Editing
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `i` | Enter insert mode |
| `x` | Clear current cell |
| `o` | Insert row below |
| `O` | Insert row above |
| `a` | Insert column to the left |
| `A` | Insert column to the right |
| `dr` | Delete current row |
| `dc` | Delete current column |
| `X` | Delete current column |
| `yr` | Yank (copy) current row |
| `yc` | Yank (copy) current column |
| `p` | Paste yanked content |
| `u` | Undo |
| `Ctrl+r` | Redo |
| `"x` | Select register x for next yank/paste |

**Count prefix for bulk operations**:
- `5dr` deletes 5 rows starting from cursor
- `3dc` deletes 3 columns starting from cursor
- `5yr` yanks 5 rows (paste will insert all 5)
- `3yc` yanks 3 columns

#### Visual Modes
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `v` | Enter visual mode (select cells) |
| `V` | Enter visual row mode (select rows) |
| `Ctrl+v` | Enter visual column mode (select columns) |
| `yy` | Yank current selection |
| `dd` | Delete current selection |

#### Search
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `/` | Start search |
| `n` | Jump to next match |
| `N` | Jump to previous match |

#### Other
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `:` | Enter command mode |
| `q` | Quit (if no unsaved changes) |
| `Ctrl+c` | Force quit |

### Insert Mode

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `Escape` / `Ctrl+[` | Save cell, return to normal mode |
| `Enter` | Save cell, return to normal mode |
| `Backspace` | Delete character |
| Any character | Insert character |

**Tip:** Use `Ctrl+[` instead of `Escape` for faster mode switching (avoids terminal escape sequence delay).


### Visual Mode

All visual modes support navigation keys (`h`, `j`, `k`, `l`, etc.) to extend the selection.

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `y` | Yank (copy) selection |
| `x` | Clear selection |
| `q` | Drag down (fill from top row) |
| `Q` | Drag right (fill from left column) |
| `Escape` / `Ctrl+[` | Cancel and return to normal mode |

#### Formatting

> **Note:** Formatting commands **modify the underlying cell values**, not just how they are displayed. These operations may be lossy (e.g., rounding) and permanently change the contents of the cells. You can undo them with `u`.

Format commands start with `f` and modify the selected cells:

| Key | Action | Example |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `f-` | Reduce decimal places | `123.456` -> `123.46` |
| `f+` | Increase decimal places | `123.4` -> `123.40` |
| `f$` | Format as currency | `1234.56` -> `$1,234.56` |
| `fe` | Format as scientific notation | `0.00123` -> `1.23e-3` |
| `f%` | Format as percentage | `0.15` -> `15%` |

In **visual row mode** (`V`), formatting applies to entire rows. In **visual column mode** (`Ctrl+v`), formatting applies to entire columns.

Non-numeric cells are left unchanged. All format operations can be undone with `u`.

#### Drag Fill

The drag feature works like spreadsheet drag-fill:
- **`q` (drag down)**: Copies the first row of the selection to all rows below, translating cell references (e.g., `A1` becomes `A2`, `A3`, etc.)
- **`Q` (drag right)**: Copies the first column of the selection to all columns to the right, translating cell references (e.g., `A1` becomes `B1`, `C1`, etc.)

In **visual row mode** (`V`), `q` fills entire rows. In **visual column mode** (`Ctrl+v`), `Q` fills entire columns.


### Command Mode

| Command | Action |
|---------|--------|
| `:w` | Save file |
| `:q` | Quit (fails if unsaved changes) |
| `:q!` | Force quit without saving |
| `:wq` | Save and quit |
| `:addcol` | Add column after current |
| `:delcol` | Delete current column |
| `:header` | Toggle header mode |
| `:calc` | Evaluate all formulas |
| `:sort` | Sort rows by current column (ascending) |
| `:sortd` | Sort rows by current column (descending) |
| `:sortr` | Sort columns by current row (ascending) |
| `:sortrd` | Sort columns by current row (descending) |
| `:grid` | Toggle grid lines |
| `:theme [name]` | Set color theme (dark, light, solarized-dark) |
| `:themes` | List available themes |
| `:clip` | Copy yanked data to system clipboard |
| `:sp` | Yank from system clipboard (then `p` to paste) |
| `:%s/old/new/g` | Find and replace (see [Find and Replace](#find-and-replace)) |
| `:[NUMBER]` | Jump to row NUMBER |
| `:[CELL]` | Jump to CELL (e.g., `:A1`, `:B5`) |

## Sorting

Sort data by navigating to the column (or row) you want to sort by, then use `:sort` or `:sortd`.

**Automatic type detection**: Tabular probes the column to determine if it contains numeric or text data:
- **Numeric sort**: If the majority of non-empty cells are numbers, sorting is done numerically
- **Text sort**: Otherwise, sorting is case-insensitive alphabetical

**Formatted number recognition**: Currency and percentages are recognized as numbers for sorting:
- Currency: `$1,234.56`, `€500`, `-$100`, `($50)`
- Percentages: `15%`, `3.5%` (sorted by their decimal value, e.g., 15% = 0.15)
- Numbers with commas: `1,234,567`

**Header preservation**: When header mode is enabled (default), the first row is kept in place during sorting.

**Examples**:
- Navigate to the "Score" column and type `:sort` to sort scores low-to-high
- Use `:sortd` to sort high-to-low (descending)
- Use `:sortr` to rearrange columns based on a row's values

## Undo/Redo

All editing operations can be undone and redone:
- `u` - Undo last change
- `Ctrl+r` - Redo last undone change

The undo history tracks cell edits, row/column insertions and deletions, drag fills, and more.

## Search

Press `/` to enter search mode. Type a pattern and press `Enter` to search. The search is case-insensitive and matches any part of cell content.

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `/` | Start search |
| `Enter` | Execute search and jump to first match |
| `n` | Jump to next match |
| `N` | Jump to previous match |
| `Escape` | Cancel search |

The status bar shows the current match position (e.g., `[3/15] matches`).

## Find and Replace

Use vim-style substitute commands to find and replace text.

### Syntax

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `:s/old/new/` | Replace first occurrence of "old" with "new" in current cell |
| `:s/old/new/g` | Replace all occurrences in current cell |
| `:%s/old/new/` | Replace first occurrence in each cell of the entire table |
| `:%s/old/new/g` | Replace all occurrences in all cells |

### With Visual Selection

When in visual mode (`v`, `V`, or `Ctrl+v`), pressing `:` enters command mode with the selection preserved:

- `:s/old/new/` - Replace within the selected cells only
- `:s/old/new/g` - Replace all occurrences within selected cells

### Examples

```
:%s/foo/bar/g      # Replace all "foo" with "bar" in entire table
:s/USD/$/          # Replace "USD" with "$" in current cell
:%s/  / /g         # Replace double spaces with single space everywhere
:%s/old//g         # Delete all occurrences of "old"
```

**Note:** Replacements are literal string matches, not regular expressions. All replace operations can be undone with `u`.

## Registers

Tabular uses a vim-style register system for yank and paste operations. Registers are storage locations that hold copied/deleted content.

### Available Registers

| Register | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `""` | Unnamed register (default) - used when no register specified |
| `"a` - `"z` | Named registers - for storing multiple clips |
| `"0` | Yank register - holds last yanked content (not affected by deletes) |
| `"_` | Black hole register - discards content (delete without affecting clipboard) |
| `"+` | System clipboard register |

### Usage

To use a register, type `"` followed by the register name before a yank or paste command:

| Example | Action |
|---------|--------|
| `"ayy` | Yank current row into register `a` |
| `"ap` | Paste from register `a` |
| `"_dd` | Delete row without affecting any register |
| `"+yy` | Yank row to system clipboard |
| `"+p` | Paste from system clipboard |
| `"0p` | Paste last yanked content (even after deletes) |

### Behavior

- **Yank operations** (`y`, `yy`, `yr`, `yc`) update both the specified register and the yank register (`"0`)
- **Delete operations** (`d`, `dd`, `dr`, `dc`, `x`) update the unnamed register but not the yank register
- **Black hole register** (`"_`) discards content entirely - useful for deleting without overwriting your clipboard
- **Named registers** (`"a`-`"z`) persist until overwritten, allowing you to store multiple pieces of content

## Formulas

Cells starting with `=` are treated as formulas. Run `:calc` to evaluate all formulas and replace them with results.

Formulas recognize formatted numbers in cell references:
- Currency values like `$1,234.56` are read as `1234.56`
- Percentages like `15%` are read as `0.15`

### Cell References

- Single cell: `A1`, `B2`, `AA10`
- Range: `A1:A10` (column), `A1:E1` (row), `A1:C3` (rectangular)

### Operators

`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%` (modulo), `^` (power)

### Functions

| Function | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `sum(range)` | Sum of values in range |
| `avg(range)` | Average of values in range |
| `min(range)` | Minimum value in range |
| `max(range)` | Maximum value in range |
| `count(range)` | Count of cells in range |

### Examples

```
=A1+B1           # Add two cells
=sum(A1:A10)     # Sum of column range
=avg(A1:E1)      # Average of row range
=A1*2+B1/2       # Arithmetic expression
=sum(A1:A10)/count(A1:A10)  # Manual average
```

**Note:** Formulas are evaluated once and replaced with values. No circular references allowed.

## Display

- **Row numbers**: Displayed on the left (1, 2, 3...)
- **Column letters**: Excel-style letters at the top (A, B, C... Z, AA, AB...)
- **Header mode**: First row is highlighted as a header (on by default, toggle with `:header`)
- **Scrolling**: Large tables scroll automatically as you navigate. Title bar shows visible range when scrolled.

## Themes

Tabular supports color themes. Switch themes with `:theme [name]`:

| Theme | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `dark` | Default dark theme |
| `light` | Light theme for light terminals |
| `solarized-dark` | Solarized dark color scheme |

Custom themes can be defined in TOML files. See [docs/styles.md](docs/styles.md) for details.

## Status Bar

The status bar shows:
- Current mode (NORMAL/INSERT/COMMAND/VISUAL)
- File name
- `[+]` indicator if there are unsaved changes
- Cursor position in Excel format (e.g., A1, B2, AA15)

Commit message:

formatting changes and numerical precision

README.md, after:

# Tabular

A lightweight, terminal-based CSV editor with vim-like keybindings.

## Installation

```bash
cargo build --release
```

## Usage

```bash
tabular <file.csv>
```

## Key Bindings

### Normal Mode

#### Navigation
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `h` / `←` | Move left |
| `j` / `↓` | Move down |
| `k` / `↑` | Move up |
| `l` / `→` | Move right |
| `gg` | Jump to first row |
| `G` | Jump to last row |
| `[N]G` | Jump to row N (e.g., `10G` jumps to row 10) |
| `0` / `^` | Jump to first column |
| `$` | Jump to last column |
| `Ctrl+d` | Half page down |
| `Ctrl+u` | Half page up |
| `Ctrl+f` | Full page down |
| `Ctrl+b` | Full page up |

**Count prefix**: Most navigation keys accept a count prefix. For example:
- `5j` moves down 5 rows
- `10l` moves right 10 columns
- `3k` moves up 3 rows

#### Editing
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `i` | Enter insert mode |
| `x` | Clear current cell |
| `o` | Insert row below |
| `O` | Insert row above |
| `a` | Insert column to the left |
| `A` | Insert column to the right |
| `dr` | Delete current row |
| `dc` | Delete current column |
| `X` | Delete current column |
| `yr` | Yank (copy) current row |
| `yc` | Yank (copy) current column |
| `p` | Paste yanked content |
| `u` | Undo |
| `Ctrl+r` | Redo |
| `"x` | Select register x for next yank/paste |

**Count prefix for bulk operations**:
- `5dr` deletes 5 rows starting from cursor
- `3dc` deletes 3 columns starting from cursor
- `5yr` yanks 5 rows (paste will insert all 5)
- `3yc` yanks 3 columns

#### Visual Modes
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `v` | Enter visual mode (select cells) |
| `V` | Enter visual row mode (select rows) |
| `Ctrl+v` | Enter visual column mode (select columns) |
| `yy` | Yank current selection |
| `dd` | Delete current selection |

#### Search
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `/` | Start search |
| `n` | Jump to next match |
| `N` | Jump to previous match |

#### Other
| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `:` | Enter command mode |
| `q` | Quit (if no unsaved changes) |
| `Ctrl+c` | Force quit |

### Insert Mode

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `Escape` / `Ctrl+[` | Save cell, return to normal mode |
| `Enter` | Save cell, return to normal mode |
| `Backspace` | Delete character |
| Any character | Insert character |

**Tip:** Use `Ctrl+[` instead of `Escape` for faster mode switching (avoids terminal escape sequence delay).


### Visual Mode

All visual modes support navigation keys (`h`, `j`, `k`, `l`, etc.) to extend the selection.

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `y` | Yank (copy) selection |
| `x` | Clear selection |
| `q` | Drag down (fill from top row) |
| `Q` | Drag right (fill from left column) |
| `Escape` / `Ctrl+[` | Cancel and return to normal mode |

#### Formatting

> **Note:** Formatting commands **modify the underlying cell values**, not just how they are displayed. These operations may be lossy (e.g., rounding) and permanently change the contents of the cells. You can undo them with `u`.

Format commands start with `f` and modify the selected cells:

| Key | Action | Example |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `ff` | Reset to default (plain number) | `$1,234.56` -> `1234.56` |
| `f,` | Add comma separators | `1234567.89` -> `1,234,567.89` |
| `f$` | Format as currency | `1234.56` -> `$1,234.56` |
| `fe` | Format as scientific notation | `0.00123` -> `1.23e-3` |
| `f%` | Format as percentage | `0.15` -> `15%` |

In **visual row mode** (`V`), formatting applies to entire rows. In **visual column mode** (`Ctrl+v`), formatting applies to entire columns.

Non-numeric cells are left unchanged. All format operations can be undone with `u`.

#### Drag Fill

The drag feature works like spreadsheet drag-fill:
- **`q` (drag down)**: Copies the first row of the selection to all rows below, translating cell references (e.g., `A1` becomes `A2`, `A3`, etc.)
- **`Q` (drag right)**: Copies the first column of the selection to all columns to the right, translating cell references (e.g., `A1` becomes `B1`, `C1`, etc.)

In **visual row mode** (`V`), `q` fills entire rows. In **visual column mode** (`Ctrl+v`), `Q` fills entire columns.


### Command Mode

| Command | Action |
|---------|--------|
| `:w` | Save file |
| `:q` | Quit (fails if unsaved changes) |
| `:q!` | Force quit without saving |
| `:wq` | Save and quit |
| `:addcol` | Add column after current |
| `:delcol` | Delete current column |
| `:header` | Toggle header mode |
| `:calc` | Evaluate all formulas |
| `:sort` | Sort rows by current column (ascending) |
| `:sortd` | Sort rows by current column (descending) |
| `:sortr` | Sort columns by current row (ascending) |
| `:sortrd` | Sort columns by current row (descending) |
| `:grid` | Toggle grid lines |
| `:prec [N]` | Set display precision (N decimal places, or `auto`) |
| `:theme [name]` | Set color theme (dark, light, solarized-dark) |
| `:themes` | List available themes |
| `:clip` | Copy yanked data to system clipboard |
| `:sp` | Yank from system clipboard (then `p` to paste) |
| `:%s/old/new/g` | Find and replace (see [Find and Replace](#find-and-replace)) |
| `:[NUMBER]` | Jump to row NUMBER |
| `:[CELL]` | Jump to CELL (e.g., `:A1`, `:B5`) |

## Sorting

Sort data by navigating to the column (or row) you want to sort by, then use `:sort` or `:sortd`.

**Automatic type detection**: Tabular probes the column to determine if it contains numeric or text data:
- **Numeric sort**: If the majority of non-empty cells are numbers, sorting is done numerically
- **Text sort**: Otherwise, sorting is case-insensitive alphabetical

**Formatted number recognition**: Currency and percentages are recognized as numbers for sorting:
- Currency: `$1,234.56`, `€500`, `-$100`, `($50)`
- Percentages: `15%`, `3.5%` (sorted by their decimal value, e.g., 15% = 0.15)
- Numbers with commas: `1,234,567`

**Header preservation**: When header mode is enabled (default), the first row is kept in place during sorting.

**Examples**:
- Navigate to the "Score" column and type `:sort` to sort scores low-to-high
- Use `:sortd` to sort high-to-low (descending)
- Use `:sortr` to rearrange columns based on a row's values

## Undo/Redo

All editing operations can be undone and redone:
- `u` - Undo last change
- `Ctrl+r` - Redo last undone change

The undo history tracks cell edits, row/column insertions and deletions, drag fills, and more.

## Search

Press `/` to enter search mode. Type a pattern and press `Enter` to search. The search is case-insensitive and matches any part of cell content.

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `/` | Start search |
| `Enter` | Execute search and jump to first match |
| `n` | Jump to next match |
| `N` | Jump to previous match |
| `Escape` | Cancel search |

The status bar shows the current match position (e.g., `[3/15] matches`).

## Find and Replace

Use vim-style substitute commands to find and replace text.

### Syntax

| Command | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| `:s/old/new/` | Replace first occurrence of "old" with "new" in current cell |
| `:s/old/new/g` | Replace all occurrences in current cell |
| `:%s/old/new/` | Replace first occurrence in each cell of the entire table |
| `:%s/old/new/g` | Replace all occurrences in all cells |

### With Visual Selection

When in visual mode (`v`, `V`, or `Ctrl+v`), pressing `:` enters command mode with the selection preserved:

- `:s/old/new/` - Replace within the selected cells only
- `:s/old/new/g` - Replace all occurrences within selected cells

### Examples

```
:%s/foo/bar/g      # Replace all "foo" with "bar" in entire table
:s/USD/$/          # Replace "USD" with "$" in current cell
:%s/  / /g         # Replace double spaces with single space everywhere
:%s/old//g         # Delete all occurrences of "old"
```

**Note:** Replacements are literal string matches, not regular expressions. All replace operations can be undone with `u`.

## Registers

Tabular uses a vim-style register system for yank and paste operations. Registers are storage locations that hold copied/deleted content.

### Available Registers

| Register | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `""` | Unnamed register (default) - used when no register specified |
| `"a` - `"z` | Named registers - for storing multiple clips |
| `"0` | Yank register - holds last yanked content (not affected by deletes) |
| `"_` | Black hole register - discards content (delete without affecting clipboard) |
| `"+` | System clipboard register |

### Usage

To use a register, type `"` followed by the register name before a yank or paste command:

| Example | Action |
|---------|--------|
| `"ayy` | Yank current row into register `a` |
| `"ap` | Paste from register `a` |
| `"_dd` | Delete row without affecting any register |
| `"+yy` | Yank row to system clipboard |
| `"+p` | Paste from system clipboard |
| `"0p` | Paste last yanked content (even after deletes) |

### Behavior

- **Yank operations** (`y`, `yy`, `yr`, `yc`) update both the specified register and the yank register (`"0`)
- **Delete operations** (`d`, `dd`, `dr`, `dc`, `x`) update the unnamed register but not the yank register
- **Black hole register** (`"_`) discards content entirely - useful for deleting without overwriting your clipboard
- **Named registers** (`"a`-`"z`) persist until overwritten, allowing you to store multiple pieces of content

## Formulas

Cells starting with `=` are treated as formulas. Run `:calc` to evaluate all formulas and replace them with results.

Formulas recognize formatted numbers in cell references:
- Currency values like `$1,234.56` are read as `1234.56`
- Percentages like `15%` are read as `0.15`

### Cell References

- Single cell: `A1`, `B2`, `AA10`
- Range: `A1:A10` (column), `A1:E1` (row), `A1:C3` (rectangular)

### Operators

`+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `%` (modulo), `^` (power)

### Functions

| Function | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `sum(range)` | Sum of values in range |
| `avg(range)` | Average of values in range |
| `min(range)` | Minimum value in range |
| `max(range)` | Maximum value in range |
| `count(range)` | Count of cells in range |

### Examples

```
=A1+B1           # Add two cells
=sum(A1:A10)     # Sum of column range
=avg(A1:E1)      # Average of row range
=A1*2+B1/2       # Arithmetic expression
=sum(A1:A10)/count(A1:A10)  # Manual average
```

**Note:** Formulas are evaluated once and replaced with values. No circular references allowed.

## Display

- **Row numbers**: Displayed on the left (1, 2, 3...)
- **Column letters**: Excel-style letters at the top (A, B, C... Z, AA, AB...)
- **Header mode**: First row is highlighted as a header (on by default, toggle with `:header`)
- **Scrolling**: Large tables scroll automatically as you navigate. Title bar shows visible range when scrolled.

### Display Precision

Control how many decimal places are shown for numeric values with `:prec`:

| Command | Effect |
|---------|--------|
| `:prec 2` | Display numbers with 2 decimal places |
| `:prec 0` | Display numbers as integers (rounded) |
| `:prec` or `:prec auto` | Display numbers as stored (default) |

**Note:** Display precision only affects how numbers are shown—it does not modify the underlying cell values. The actual data remains unchanged.

## Themes

Tabular supports color themes. Switch themes with `:theme [name]`:

| Theme | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `dark` | Default dark theme |
| `light` | Light theme for light terminals |
| `solarized-dark` | Solarized dark color scheme |

Custom themes can be defined in TOML files. See [docs/styles.md](docs/styles.md) for details.

## Status Bar

The status bar shows:
- Current mode (NORMAL/INSERT/COMMAND/VISUAL)
- File name
- `[+]` indicator if there are unsaved changes
- Cursor position in Excel format (e.g., A1, B2, AA15)
